AWS  Lambda and API Gateway

Building a Proof of Concept Character Generator
 with AWS Lambda and AWS API Gateway

This assumes you have an AWS account. Most everything should be available
under the Free tier of services.

To get a free AWS account:
  https://aws.amazon.com
  "Create an AWS Account"

  If you are an educator, U.S. veteran, or student, check out:
    https://aws.amazon.com/education/awseducate


All actions will be done from the AWS management console.
  To find a specific service, put the service name in the search
    bar at the top of the menu bar. Or uses the "Services" drop down
    on the top left of the menu bar.

  Each Section below uses the service name as the main header.

  The '->' notation is "then select", so the English sentence
    "Select 'Roles', then select 'Create Role' is:
      'Roles' -> 'Create role'

  The 'ctrl-s' notation is for 'hold down the control key and press the
    "s" on your keyboard'. This is used to save the code file after an edit.

This also assumes a decent level of "figure it out", either by searching or
  poking around. I'm just learning it myself, so please don't think I know
  it all. Heck, I'm surprised I know this much.


IAM

Do this first, it'll make life a lot easier.

Left menu 'Access Management' -> 'Roles' -> 'Create role'

The 'AWS Service' block is highlighted by default. Under
'Choose a use case', under 'Common used services', select 'Lambda'.
Use Case:  "Lambda", vice "AWSServiceRoleForLambda"
Click 'Next:'
Under 'Permissions policies', in the 'Filter policies' search bar:
  Enter 'AWSLambdaBasicExecutionRole', and select the checkbox next to it.
Click 'Next'
In 'Role name' enter 'chargen', without the quotes.
Click 'Create role'


Lambda

I'm using the default Python (3.14) one of the semi-default runtimes. Use whatever floats your boat.

On the Lambda dashboard, 'Create function'. For the next page options:
  'Author from scratch'  # Looks to be the initial default.
  Under 'Basic information': 'Function name' is 'chargen',
    'Runtime' is 'Python 3.14'
Architecture -> arm64 for reduced cost
  Under 'Permissions', 'Change default execution role',
    select 'Use an existing role'
    In the 'Existing role' dropdown, select 'chargen'.
  Select 'Create function'

Note that you are in the "Code" tab.

Under 'Code source', select the file 'lambda_function.py'. 
 - Right click it -> 'Open'. 
 - In the tab to the right, you'll see some basic code.
 - Remove it. 
 - Copy the 'first_code/lambda_function.py' from my repo into your lambda_function.py IDE.
 - 'ctrl-s', then 'Deploy'.

Change to the "Test" tab.

The first time you click 'Test', it will take you to 'Create test event'.
Keep the "Invocation type": "Synchronous" default.
In 'Event name', enter 'test_chargen', Click "Save", then 'Test'.
In "Execution function", click "Details"
You should see a JSON 'status code' of 200, and a 'body' result. The body should look like the response you returned.

# Does this still work?
This should work. If it doesn't, click 'Monitor' -> 'Logs' -> 'LogStream' for the most recent log event. On the last log line, click the three dots to the far right, and it should expand the line.

Make note of the 'Copy ARN' button on the function dashboard.


API Gateway

When you move from Lambda to API Gateway, open it up in a new tab.
  - You'll need data from the Lambda tab.

Under 'API types', click 'Create HTTP API' 
Configure API 
 - API Name: (required)
 - Keep "IPv4"
 - Add Integration
 - - Lambda
 - - AWS Region: choose your region
 - - Lambda function: select your function
 
Review and Create
 - Routes: Edit

Configure routes
 - Take the default
 - Review and Create

Create

Routes
 - Deploy

Deploy API popup
 - "create a new stage" in the paragraph given
 - Name: Put in a stage, like "dev"
 - Description:
 - Stage deployment
 - - Enable automatic deployment
 - Create

Stages
 - Deploy

That gives you a URL like:   https://<unique_id>.execute-api.<region>.amazonaws.com/<stage>
 - Add to the end:  /<function>

You can hit that with a browser or curl.

HTML

You can add that URL as an href tag, or whatever you like. It works on static pages like Github pages.


Next steps

You may prefer another language, or a more complex character generation system. This just connects some of the dots, and hopefully does so in a way that lets you build your own thing.

I'm going to be extending this with some database support for various names, and whatever else I can think of. The 'first_code/lambda_function.py should get you going, but my new stuff and changes are in the 'code/' directory.

Engage your creativity and see what happens.
